Most dog owners are doing three of these
six things. Maybe four if they're really
on it. But all six, super rare. And that
gap, that's where the behavior problems
live. Now, I'm a pro dog trainer and
I've been doing this for over 13 years
every single day, and I've worked with
hundreds if not thousands of dogs in
person and [music] millions online, and
of course all their owners. And every
single time I dig into what's going on
at home or while they're out for a walk,
the same patterns come up over and over
and over again. So, make sure you guys
stick with me through this entire video
because number five is one that almost
literally nobody is talking about out
there, and it might be the most
misunderstood thing in all of dog
training. So, let's get into it right
now. Number one is daily and physical
exercise. Now, I know what you're
thinking, "Tom, duh, duh, obviously you
got to walk your freaking dog, duh." But
here's what most people get wrong about
exercising their dog. A 20-minute stroll
around the block, a 30-minute stroll
around the block, even a nice hike is
good, but that's not exercise for most
dog. That's a bathroom break with
scenery. Guys, dogs, especially those
high-energy working dog breeds, young
dogs, they need real physical exertion.
We're talking about getting their heart
rate up, burning actual energy out
there, using their body in the way that
it was designed to be used. Think about
it this way. If I went to the gym, like
just your average normal gym or gym at
home, now I only lifted
dumbbell for, let's say, 10 minutes. You
wouldn't exactly go home feeling tired
and satisfied. Your dog feels the same
way when they're getting that little
amount of exercise. Here's what proper
daily exercise actually looks like.
Let's just generalize, 30 to 60 minutes
of purposeful movement. Fetch, Frisbee,
running, structured walks, swimming,
tug, play, moving, not just kind of
galloping through the neighborhood.
Off-leash time in a safe enclosed space
where you can really let your dog
stretch out and move. Or, if you have an
off-leash dog and you've taken my
courses in off-leash training, then you
can have your dog off-leash anywhere.
But, breed-appropriate activities, like
for a Border Collie, they need something
very, very different from a Basset
Hound. Here's what happens when dogs
don't get enough physical exercise. They
just find an outlet. And trust me, you
do not want them to choose what their
outlet is, cuz that's what you guys are
dealing with. Chewed-up furniture,
shoes, digging up the yard, jumping on
guests, barking at everything that
moves. You guys probably are dealing
with this all the time. Now, again,
guys, no bad dogs, but the dog is on
exercise. It's still on you to be able
to go out and exercise these dogs. This
brings me to number two, which honestly
may surprise some of you, but maybe not
if you guys are watching my videos.
Mental stimulation. This one is
absolutely massive, guys, and it is so
underrated that it genuinely frustrates
me and your dog. So, here's the truth. A
physically tired dog have a mind that's
racing. Think of it like this. If
someone made you to do physical labor
all dang day, digging a ditch, whatever.
You never have a single meaningful
conversation or solve a single problem,
you'd go crazy doing the same thing over
and over and over again. Dogs are
intelligent animals, and their brain
needs work. Mental stimulation creates
what trainers call cognitive fatigue,
and that mentally tired dog starts to
become a calm dog, a content dog, a dog
that lies down and actually relaxes on
their own. So, what does mental
stimulation actually look like
day-to-day? Well, of course, it depends
on the dog, so read between the lines
here, but let's think about this. Puzzle
toys, treat dispensing games, those
little treat games that you guys can
get. These force your dog to think about
problem-solving. Scent work is really
great around the house. Go hiding
something in the corner. Hide treats.
Like, maybe 5 minutes of learning
something new will absolutely tank a
dog. They will be exhausted. But, the
beautiful thing, guys, is mental
stimulation doesn't have to take a ton
of your time. 15, 20 minutes of focused
mental work can make a profound
difference in your dog's overall
behavior and mood. All right, we've got
physical exercise, we got mental
stimulation checked off this list, but
here's something I see people skip all
the time, even with a dog that's been in
your home for years. Number three, guys,
is structured training and obedience
practice. We've talked about a little
bit with the first two. And before you
say, "Well, my dog already knows sit,
and they know down, and they know heel,
and all that stuff." Let me stop you
right there. That's not exactly what I'm
talking about here. Training is not just
a one-time event. It's not something
that you do when your dog is a puppy,
then check it off, and that's it
forever. Training is an ongoing
conversation between you and your dog.
It's a daily practice that keeps the
communication sharp, keeps the skills
fresh, and your dog needs that mental
challenge, just like we talked about
before. But here's what I want you to
understand. Practice in low distractions
first, environments that do not stress
your dog out. You don't want to
overwhelm your dog. You have to practice
in context with minimal distraction,
with little stuff going on, then you
start to graduate to higher distractions
and reality. And here's the big payoff
of all this, guys. Nobody talks about
this. Training builds your dog's
confidence. When a dog understands what
you're saying, they know exactly how to
succeed. So that means they're going to
be less anxious, they're going to be
less reactive, potentially even less
aggressive, and far more relaxed every
day. Training isn't just about commands,
guys. It's about building a dog who
understands the world that they live in
with the people they live in it with. If
you want a step-by-step framework of all
this and all the trainings that I've
done and all the systems I put into
place with all my dogs and all my
clients, I put everything together in my
online courses. Over 13 years of
information up here. The link is in the
description below, whether you're
dealing with a puppy, you want to get a
hard reset, you you a reactive dog, your
dog is dragging you down, or you want
your dog to be off leash, all of that
information is in the link in the
description. Let's [music] get right
back into it. Number four is clear
boundaries and leadership. So, you might
think like, oh, I already know what that
is. No, you probably don't know what
this is. Clear leadership and boundaries
every single day will quite literally
change your life with your dog as it's
done with millions of people I've worked
with online. Now, I want to be really
clear about what I mean by leadership
because this word gets misused and
thrown out constantly. Leadership is not
about being harsh and being alpha. It's
not about being dominant in any
aggressive way. It's about being
consistent, clear, and calm. I used to
work with wolves in Colorado, and the
alpha, or the one that was in charge,
was the oldest and wisest and the
calmest. Dogs are not designed to lead
themselves. They're just not. And when
we fail to provide them clear leadership
and consistent boundaries, we then
create a dog that is stressed, that is
anxious because now they think that they
have to figure everything out on their
own, which is why I talk about this so
much in my leash reactivity course, and
that's the heavy burden that dogs have
to carry. Daily leadership and
boundaries, what does this look like
practically? Let's dive into that.
Consistent rules, the same rules apply
every day all the time, right? Not just
when you feel like enforcing them. When
you say sit, it's not optional one time
and then uh they have to do it the next
time. But you want to be clear. You want
to be calm. You want to tell your dog
what to do, not just what not to do. You
have to teach them the skill sets. That
means your dog doesn't get to decide
what guest gets rushed, what couch they
want to jump on, what leash they're
going to pull, who they're going to pull
towards, what dog they're going to go
react to. Following through all of this
with your dog, meaning like if you say
sit, they sit every time. Not most of
the time. It's not going to be optional.
A dog with clear leadership is a relaxed
dog like we've talked about earlier in
this video. What you really want to work
on are those leadership skills because
your dog depends on you. Your dog needs
you to handle these situations cuz they
don't know what to do because they're
dogs. And here's the thing, if you're
not providing that leadership, those
boundaries consistently, your dog will
fill that vacuum quick. They have to.
There's nobody else doing it. It's just
how they're wired. So, give them the
gift of knowing exactly where they stand
with you every single time. Number five,
guys, is proper socialization
neutrality. Now, this is important,
guys, because socialization for most dog
owners out there is if your dog wants to
go see another dog and play, they play.
That is not it. Proper socialization,
specifically, is about that neutrality.
Neutral means calm, chill. I'm neutral.
I'm here. I don't care. We can play, we
can not play. I don't care. I'm not
going to react, but I'm going to chill
here. It means that they're not getting
overly stimulated. They're not getting
aggressive. They're not jumping up in
the air. They're just calm and
confident. Here's why this matters so
much to you guys. Now, please listen up.
A dog that goes absolutely bananas every
time it sees another dog, whether that's
excitement or aggression or
overstimulation or all of those things,
is a dog that has not been properly
socialized to neutrality. And that dog
is going to struggle on every single
walk and every public place and every
social situation. I don't know why I'm
doing this, but it's true. If you allow
your dog to see everything all the time,
you're going to be pulled, you're going
to be dragged. There's no boundaries.
There's no leadership. Daily
socialization for most dogs is going out
in controlled exposure situations and
training environments. Putting your dog
in these situations and letting them
know, maybe you can go see this dog.
Maybe you can go see this person, but
it's everything is predicated off of
you. Because the goal is a dog that can
walk past another dog on the street
without losing their mind. That kind of
dog has real social confidence, and it
comes from patient, consistent,
structured exposure over time. Now, I'm
not saying your dog can't greet other
dogs at all. But what I am saying is if
you allow your dog to greet every person
and every dog, you are going to be
creating a problem. I promise you. I've
seen it over and over over again. All
right, now we are on the home stretch,
guys. Number six is the one thing that
ties everything together. And to be
honest with you guys, it might be the
most important one of them all. All of
these, when I was thinking about this,
when I was thinking about this video, I
was like, "Okay, what are people
struggling with the most?" They're all
really important, but let's dive into
number six because it's something that
never gets talked about cuz people don't
think it needs to be talked about. But
number six, guys, is quality bonding and
connection time with your dog. You have
to understand that you as the dog owner
is what your dog lives for. Unless it's
my dog Lakota, she lives for Frisbee. We
spend so much time thinking about what
we need to do for our dogs, like
exercise, training, boundaries,
socialization, or neutrality, but we
forget one thing that our dogs want more
than anything, which is us, our
attention. [music] You are your dog's
entire world. You are their safe place.
You are their happiness, their favorite
part of every single [music] day. And if
we are rushing through life, we're on
our phone, we're on our laptop, we are
barely acknowledging them, and that's
getting worse [music] and worse as the
generations continue. We are getting
further and further and further away
from nature and with our [music] dogs.
And our dogs feel that disconnection,
for sure. It shows up in their behavior.
It shows up in training. It shows up
everywhere. Simply just being present
with your dog, looking at your dog, or
just hanging out on the floor together,
or just going for a walk, just existing
in the same space is amazing for your
dog. And the beautiful thing of all
this, guys, is bonding time doesn't have
to be complicated or expensive. In fact,
it costs nothing. It just has to be
genuine. Literally, the first thing I do
in the morning is I get up, [music] I go
to my dog, I pet her on the head, and I
tell her I love her, right? And I walk
away. Because your dog doesn't need more
stuff, guys. Like that's the thing is
they need you. It's like kids that if
you're working all the time or you're
not spending a lot of time with your
kids, like buying them stuff and cool
stuff isn't going to replace you as a
parent. [music] But here's what I see in
my years of working with dogs. The
deepest behavior transformations don't
just come from better training. They
come from better relationships, guys. I
can't shout this from the rooftops loud
enough. But here's the real question for
you guys. I want you to answer in the
comments below right now. Which one of
these six are you guys missing? And I
want you to be honest because, I mean,
honesty [music] is the best recipe,
right? Drop it in the comments below. I
read every single one of them all the
time and I want to know where you guys
are at specifically with this list. And
listen, if you guys want the full
systems in which I train all of my dogs
in the complete road map, again, we have
our leash reactivity course, we have our
off-leash course, we have a
your dog pulls like crazy called master
the walk course, and we have the
kickstarter course, which is excellent
for new dog owners, new puppy owners,
and you just need a reset in your life.
All of that is listed in the link below
as well as all of our equipment that we
use, our treat pouches, our slip
leashes, our long lines, our treats,
etc. All of that listed below. Thank you
guys
from the bottom of my heart for
listening and I'll see you guys on the
next one. Peace.